When China Gets a Mythos Model
Soon, a Chinese lab will develop an AI model with capabilities on par with Anthropic’s Claude
Mythos. Mythos’ potential to wreak cyber havoc has forced the White House to create what, to
quote Dean Ball, is a “de facto involuntary licensing/preapproval regime for frontier models.” Will
the CCP similarly panic when the day comes in China?

In June, Z.ai cofounder Jie Tang told Elon on X that China will have a model on par with Mythos
before the end of the year.1 Even if he’s off by a few months (Kimi K3’s release shows we’re
getting close) the clock is ticking for regulators in Beijing to respond.




Reuters, on July 7, reported that Chinese regulators were considering “potentially restricting
overseas access to China's most advanced AI models.” And Xi himself has raised technical AI
safety to the highest policy agenda. In his speech at WAIC yesterday, he said:

“We must attach great importance to the various endogenous and derivative risks brought about
by AI, and work to build systems of laws and regulations, technical monitoring, risk early
warning, and emergency response. We must reinforce the safety baseline, prevent misuse and
abuse, and ensure that artificial intelligence always remains under human control.”2

1
    Someone should write the piece of what France does when Mistral trains a Mythos model, Dubai etc
2
    Per Concordia AI’s excellent State of AI Safety in China (2026) report:
State media coverage of a speech by President Xi Jinping referenced “risks of technological
loss of control,” and a major standard-setting body has flagged the need for “circuit breakers”
and “safety stop switches.”
We wanted to share our team’s own theories about what may come next. In our eyes, the story
of Chinese Mythos may pan out in three main ways:
    ● a continuation of laissez faire “let it rip”: the model releases with minimal intervention;
    ● ‘Glasswing with Chinese Characteristics’: access is limited first to ministries, then key
       trusted companies, and only later in a limited fashion to consumers
    ● The black-box, where we will only ever hear rumors of the power of China’s Mythos,
       contained solely within labs and government ministries

We tell the story of these paths as hypothetical scenarios because all of these outcomes seem
plausible. We hope that a creative approach inspires flexible thinking on preparedness: USG, AI
policy people, safety advocates, and researchers should be prepared for whatever may come.
We create the fictional Z.ai GLM 6 to be the hypothetical Mythos-level model that will rock the
world. For all we know, the real Chinese Mythos may come from Kimi, DeepSeek, Qwen, or
from any other lab.


Scenario 1: GLM 6 Drops Into the Wild
One day, GLM 6 dropped just as all other models, Chinese or American, had dropped before
Mythos: a hype tweet. Only a few hours later, just like how its other models have been released,
Zhipu makes GLM 6 open-sourced, with its weights available freely online.




      Fictitious graph showing GLM 6’s capabilities. GPT 5.6 performs worse than Mythos on exploiting cyber
 vulnerabilities. In the pre-Mythos era, OpenAI would have never released this model and waited for the line to beat
                                        Mythos. Now, sandbagging is the meta!
After a few days, two phenomena occur simultaneously. First, cyber professionals tinker around
and discover GLM 6 can find zero-day vulnerabilities the same way Mythos could. They
scramble to inform labs and policymakers, both in the US and in China. Second, enterprises
that just want to use good, cheap models are realizing GLM 6 is a saving grace. Before, some
companies like Uber Eats, Siemens, and Shopify had already begun to integrate Chinese
models in their workflow. But now, with GLM 6, there is no trade-off between cheaper tokens
and amazing performance. On the graph of enterprise usage of Chinese models, the slope has
a dramatic uptick.




The two phenomena pose real questions to Beijing. A model that is democratizing cyber offense
(something the Chinese government believed it had an edge with on everyone sans the NSA) is
proliferating worldwide. Cyberattacks seem like they’re on the verge of inflicting disproportionate
financial damage on China’s leading companies (since America and friends have already been
hardened by Mythos access). But Beijing also sees the economic upside. Zhipu’s market cap
approaches $500bn, instantly becoming one of China’s largest companies. GLM 6 is China’s
chance to beat America in leading model adoption, crater the western labs’ businesses, and
lead global enterprises and government systems to turn to China as the go-to technology
provider.

Besides, struggle is part of the process. The Party has been willing to accept sacrifices during
COVID opening up, some bank failures, and tech crackdowns; this round of cyberattacks could
just be the culling before China emerges stronger than ever. On the verge of securing a new
commanding height, bureaucrats are torn over how to achieve AI ambitions and security at
home.
The Trump administration is also torn. Perhaps the uptick is an anomaly, and no policy action is
required. USG rails against China for distilling and then releasing such a model, declares that
government contractors can’t build with Chinese open models, but doesn’t outlaw models as it
would be too silly to try to ban a file that can just be torrented. When Beijing doesn’t send any
signals on cracking down on GLM 6, Washington decides to let it rip as well, screaming at its
leading labs to drop something open. If there’s going to be a powerful open source model out
making waves, it should probably be American.

Z.ai workers, already in a sleepless daze from the eighteen-hour days up to launch, don’t know
what to do. The celebrations from the launch party have subsided into stress. They are already
talking with the relevant authorities, but what to do? Because they open sourced the model, like
they did with 5.2, there is no putting the genie back in the bottle. The model, with well over a
trillion parameters, can’t just be weaponized by anyone with too much free time and a Mac Mini.
But there are plenty of actors out there — terrorists, companies with the wrong interests,
criminal syndicates — who could get their hands on a good number of racks to turn the model
against China. All Z.ai can do is hold their breath and wait for the fallout.

The Party decided that GLM 6 wasn’t dangerous enough to strangle, but the model did serve as
a wake-up call. GLM 6 is now the ceiling for unsupervised drops, and every model after gets
scrutinized closely before release. Without much fuss, China implements a stricter licensing
regime that doesn’t just check for politically unacceptable output, but also cyber capabilities.


Scenario 2: Glasswing with Chinese Characteristics
After seeing Mythos, Beijing realized that emergent capabilities could inflict real damage in the
wrong hands. The best means of mitigating the negative effects of future models seemed to be
a Project Glasswing-type undertaking. In August 2026, Ding Xuexiang gives a speech implying
that breakout domestic AI models should be shared with important government ministries and
corporate giants like Baidu, Alibaba, and Tencent before deployment.

Tang Jie and team had already deeply internalized the risks of misuse for Mythos-level models.
After Ding’s speech, Z.ai postpones the launch party for GLM 6 to further evaluate the model’s
capabilities internally, at which point their researchers realize what their creation is capable of.
Determined to not be disappeared, company leadership pitches Project IceFeather (冰羽项目)
to the Cyberspace Administration of China. The CAC, of course, takes the lead on announcing
the initiative in October, but Z.ai is credited as the “core private sector partner” of the project.

Government ministries and key SOEs like State Grid get access first. They use their exclusive
access window to check for vulnerabilities in their own systems while the MSS trawls for exploits
that can be used offensively overseas.
The Party’s involvement in Project IceFeather means the state is also a co-owner of the model’s
risks. The dominant strategy for bureaucrats instructed to “Evaluate first, deploy later” turns out
to be endless evaluation. The downside risk of letting anyone with enough compute get to
punch a hole in China’s critical cyber architecture seems much scarier to the system than
marginally more productivity growth and global discourse power as the open standard for AI. At
first, nobody quite decides that the model should be released, as nobody wants to be
responsible for what would happen post-release. But after seeing American models continue to
advance and the gap between U.S. and China widen, the trigger gets pulled. Strong safeguards
are put on the model, perhaps to the point of excess, and the regulators hope that domestic
infrastructure has been sufficiently strengthened by Project IceFeather. Hesitant to hand over
their golden goose, Z.ai leadership offers API access instead of the full model weights. A
lobotomized GLM 6-Open gets released, while the real breakthroughs Z.ai plans to monetize by
selling tokens.




               Visualization of the fictitious GLM 6’s public safeguards. Adapted from Anthropic.


Despite having the best Chinese model, Z.ai stock price doesn’t moonshot as feet-dragging
over Project IceFeather spooks investors who worry that the government won’t allow them to
monetize the model beyond state customers, much less into key markets overseas.3 While the
MSS has the time of its life hacking away at everyone who didn’t get access to Mythos,
domestic coders still mostly use transfer stations to access frontier capabilities.

After two months, regulators expand the circle of trusted users for GLM 6, to include provincial
governments as well as trusted local tech leaders like Alibaba, Xiaomi and Huawei. It takes
another few months for Chinese firms broadly to get access, by which point other domestic labs
have developed roughly similar models. Thanks to pressure from the Trump administration,

3
 Reuters reported on July 7th that “Chinese authorities have held meetings ​with top tech firms
over the past month about potentially restricting overseas access to China's most
advanced AI models.”
OpenAI releases a cyber-lobotomized open model on par with GLM 6, which finally convinces
CAC that Zhipu should be able to allow the world to access its model.


Scenario 3: Zhipu Emerges as the Certified National Champion as
a Covetous Beijing Keeps Frontier AI In-House
Li Qiang, China’s Number Two, wasn’t kidding. What Beijing really cares about is really
“upholding the bottom line of AI security,” not the platitudes in Xi’s speech at WAIC about
“openness, win-win” and “mutual learning between civilizations” that the credulous foreigners
ate up. Behind the scenes, Beijing has maintained deep insights into exactly how capable
China’s top AI models were, and was preparing for the moment when it knew it would have to
step in.

In September 2026, the Cybersecurity Administration of China publicly updates its AI model
registry regulations. Whereas previously, the rules only governed new models and algorithms
with the ability to “shape public opinion,” it now requires companies to report any major update,
self-assess for potentially catastrophic cyber risks, and give the government exclusive access
indefinitely. Remembering the fates of DiDi and Ant Group, companies all know better than to
not comply.

Now the state now gets first dibs on every new model release and update. An internally
assembled testing capacity through the MSS and PLA Cyberspace Force meant that when GLM
6 proved to be genuinely exceptional, Zhongnanhai was the first to know. Having recognized
that this model was a potential ‘assassin’s mace’ Xi had directed the state to forge a decade
ago,4 there was no way the security state would allow its capability to be open sourced. Despite
Foreign Ministry protestations that releasing this model globally would improve China’s standing
in the world, and MIIT officials salivating at the domestic productivity boost the model could
provide, the security state was not having it. Open soucing this model would forfeit a cyber
window of opportunity and allow Xinjiang separatists and Falun Gong activists with some Azure
credits the same hacking capabilities as the domestic security apparatus.

Two days after GLM 6 was sent over to the state, Tang Jie and co. were summoned to CAC.
Over long hours and litres of tea, a deal was struck. The “real” GLM 6 would become available
to government entities: specifically, it would be deployed on-premise into core governmental
functions that benefit from such capabilities — including defense. Z.ai would release to the
public a lobotomized version of the model, thoroughly tested by both the company and the
government to ensure its cyber capabilities are satisfactorily weakened. The lab gets a contract
with lucrative term and the state agrees to help ‘persuade’ other chinese model makers to sign



4
  From a 2020 Xi speech: “We must build on our advantages, solidify and increase the leading
international positions of strong industries, and forge some ‘assassin's mace’ technologies.” CSET
defines a 杀手锏 as ‘a stratagem or resource that, when used at the critical moment in a competition or
confrontation, proves decisive’.
away their compute both in the mainland and at southeast asian neoclouds. Instead of cyber
capabilities getting democratized with the likes of Xinjiang separatists and the Falun Gong
In a world where cyber capabilities have the potential to become democratized, Beijing has
made sure that the tools in its arsenal are of a different tier.




                                  An imaginary rendering by GPT 5.5.


Parts of the meeting leak to Reuters, but no matter. At first, no one was surprised that the
Chinese government was getting better AI than the masses. Z.ai was now the proper national
champion, but there was no actual proof that they made something transformative.

Then the attacks started. Beijing knew that Americans, armed with Mythos-level defensive
capabilities for months already, were on the lookout for any sign of trouble, and did not want to
re-inflame the bilateral relationship at a time when it could not expect to extract meaningful
concessions. Instead, it focuses its new cyber bazooka on less-prepared countries: wavering
capitals in the Global South, less developed neighbors, and eventually Europe. It was easy
enough to hack into Paraguay’s citizen records; by early 2027, Asunción was frightened into
dropping recognition of Taiwan. European technology companies in the semiconductor supply
chain, began reporting cyber attacks at a much-increased scale. Brussels bureaucrats began
fretting about blackmail of uncertain origin.

Other Chinese labs, having signed over a good amount of their compute to Zhipu, slowly
progress on their own capabilities but still get prevented from releasing their weights by the
CAC. By this point, collaboration between the government and Z.ai has reached new heights.
Building on GLM 6, the lab is now developing proprietary models tailored to government wants
and new-generation cyber weapons. On the outside, Z.ai still looks like a normal lab, continuing
to release consumer-grade models, open-source research, and AI products. The to-G side is
heavily insulated; researchers must be thoroughly vetted before being deployed to serve the
government, and are required to surrender their passports. The CAC occasionally poaches star
researchers from other labs under the guise of “national development consultation.”
Which Scenario is Most Likely?
How likely are each of these scenarios? Here at ChinaTalk, we’ve been having lively internal
debates over what might come next. Here are our thoughts:




Jordan: Chinese glasswing (Scenario 2) most likely (65%) then ‘let it rip’ (scenario 1) (20%)
then nationalization (scenario 3) (15%). On 3, despite Xi’s desire for SOEs to perform, I think he
has learned his lesson through the tech crackdown that the state can’t really be relied on to
produce the sort of technological breakthroughs required to keep pace with the AI frontier (he
learned why the unicorns went away). Some muddle through of tighter regulation, golden shares
and minority state investment, and a Glasswing-style release as opposed to an indefinite
lockdown on access and total nationalization seems like the more likely equilibrium over the
next two years.

I also don’t see the labs keeping their best capabilities open forever. Chinese model makers
have already begun to go closed source to make money and as Reuters reported there are
influential strains within the system skeptical of allowing foreigners’ access to China’s best
models. The benefits to the Chinese government of open sourcing powerful AI are diffuse
(global PR, undermining the western AI ecosystem), while the harms are concentrated in a
paranoid security state that is not interested in democratizing access to hacking. Plus, Xi really
likes assassins maces, and a world-conquering cyberweapon is not the sort of thing that you
give up for good global PR. Xi’s WAIC speech to me felt like it could just be a barbarian
handling exercise akin to his 2017 World Economic Forum speech. In that address, he promised
to serve as a counterweight to Trump tariffs but immediately started on a global campaign of
economic coercion once security issues towards Korea, Japan, and Australia cropped up. When
things get serious once China has an AI model that can truly compete with or even exceed the
cyber capabilities the US has access to, it’s unlikely he will really want to hand over that
capability to Huggingface.

Lastly, Zhipu, Deepseek, and Moonshot, the leading Chinese labs now that everyone good at
Qwen quit, do not own complements like Nvidia which give them economic incentives to
commoditize themselves. Their CEOs are genuinely ideologically committed to open source, but
they do need to keep money coming in to do novel research and train models. Today I don’t see
a coordinated national strategy to pop the west’s AI bubble by driving down the global cost of
intelligence. But that may be emerging, evidenced by Xi’s speech and the Deepseek
investment.

I do not believe that today there is a national strategy to pop the west’s AI bubble, but it is
possible that the government decides it’s strategically important enough to foot the bill for its top
firms to drive down the global cost of intelligence. It would not take nearly as much money as Xi
has already spent in more hardware-oriented industrial policy efforts around cars, solar, and
semiconductors.

Aqib
I see Scenario 1 and 2 equally likely (45%), Scenario 3 least likely (10%). My stock in Scenario
1 went up after seeing Kimi K3 deployed without any fuss, coupled with the recent statements
from WAIC.

Scenario 1, where a frontier lab “lets it rip” and deals with consequences later, cannot be
counted out. In a vacuum, Z.ai released GLM 5.2 after Mythos seemingly without any fanfare or
close scrutiny; the Chinese government also does not seem to monitor model releases for cyber
or bio capabilities. Z.ai’s founder recently wrote a memo reiterating support for open source, and
Xi prefers to have a “water-flow” mindset toward AI. Most recently, Kimi K3, a powerful open-
source model, was released seemingly without close scrutiny as well. This language and action
suggests a willingness to keep the models open and public.

However, recently government interest in monitoring models more closely has risen. Reuters
reported that Beijing is mulling future powerful models being “barred from public release or
restricted to domestic use.” Model developers, who keep regular informal communication with
regulators, would likely communicate such capabilities to the regulator to receive informal
approval before release, lest the developer receive a crackdown for releasing the model too
hastily.
The scenario has some uncertainty, and reality could branch out at different points. GLM 6
could be released as a closed-weight model, just like Qwen; that would mean the model could
be put back in the bottle if the capabilities were too dangerous. The Party may also decide that,
after release, it is worth rescinding the model because the risks are just too large. Chinese
SOEs have notoriously poor cybersecurity, so they may be the first ones hit. We don’t know
what happens afterwards in this world; the hammer could come down hard on the entire AI
industry, or it could just be the beginning of a stricter licensing regime.

Lily thinks China’s Mythos won’t be locked behind closed doors indefinitely, but a Project
Glasswing-style rollout with Chinese bureaucratic characteristics is possible. The Party’s
concerns about AI security go hand in hand with support for AI-enabled One Person Companies
and the belief that AI will unlock new productivity increases. Certainly, there are forces in
Zhongnanhai that want China’s developers to be working with the best possible tools. But the
fact that everyone with the technical expertise necessary to brief the government also has a
horse in the AI race could be a powerfully perverse incentive.

Overall, Scenario 2 most likely (45%), then Scenario 1 (35%), then Scenario 3 (20%). I think
Scenario 3 is the least likely because the private sector has already produced such high quality
models on their own, so perhaps the party would be skeptical that state involvement would
produce something more capable.

Irene is uncertain about exactly how CAC regulators will patch holes in the existing registry
system, but thinks a secret model is more likely that people assume.

There are recent signals in favor of the theory that CCP leadership is genuinely concerned
about AI safety. Xi Jinping will make his WAIC debut in Shanghai this month, where, according
to state media, he will "systemically elaborate on China's policies, position, visions and
propositions on AI development and governance." AI guardrails came up during the Xi-Trump
summit in May. And here’s how Zhou Haibing, vice minister of the National Development and
Reform Commission, paraphrased Xi Jinping’s message on AI safety during a press conference
in June 2026, just a week after Fable’s first release (emphases are Irene’s):

       [China will] enact the responsibilities of a major country, manage and control risks,
       strengthen prevention efforts, explore cooperative opportunities in AI oversight, and
       jointly defend against AI safety risks. [中国将... 履行大国责任，管控风险、强化预防
       ，探索开展人工智能监管合作，共同防范人工智能安全风险。]

The emergence of keen prevention rhetoric means Beijing expects regulatory agencies to stamp
down on risks before they proliferate. Barring truly necessary structural changes, a “let it rip”
approach is just not in the PRC’s deeply conservative policy psyche. Publicized regulations will
change with the times, but Irene expects much of the negotiations on frontier capabilities inside
China to be kept under the hood going forward, no matter how leaky the system can be at
times.
The PRC has an extensive history of secret strategic projects. If Beijing truly believes that AI will
shape national power — much like weapons of mass destruction did during the Cold War —
then it probably is already tempted by its old playbook. “Two Bombs, One Satellite” was highly
classified in its initial years, and some of the researchers involved were not permitted to
publicize their experiences until decades later. Mao’s “Third Front” (which Irene has written
about before) involved building entire secret cities in remote western regions to hide defense-
industrial capabilities from prying American and Soviet eyes.

In many senses, hiding a frontier model is easier than hiding literal mines and factories. Despite
significant research efforts (including by our own Aqib and Nick), no one has high-confidence
estimates on how much AI compute China has. Satellite data on data centers do not correspond
neatly onto actual compute amounts, because no one knows what chips are inside or what
utilization rates look like. Amid an entire gold rush of companies training and using AI systems,
it’d be quite easy to hide a proprietary system in plain sight.

But one challenge might be personnel. There are only so many star AI researchers in China. It’s
a tightly-knit circle, and many have overseas experience. Beijing is probably wary of bringing
some of these folks onto the high side to build black-box systems, but arguably has no
alternative. This is why Irene imagined a scenario where the CAC tries to semi-absorb part of
Z.ai rather than build a whole secret lab from scratch.

Overall, I see Scenario 3 most likely (45%, even though we won’t find out), then Scenario 1
(30%), with Scenario 2 least likely (25%).



What Do You Think?
But we’d like to hear from our readers, too! What do you think? Rank your scenarios from most
to least likely at this form.

https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdPB1_jLhWgsD0OPBgk6U2AQ9FbpmW3NLsNazS5HCh-w0wefQ/viewform
